Statement of Purpose
====================

After carefully considering my aptitudes, interests, my previous experiences and my ultimate professional ambition, I have decided to apply to the Master's program in Informatics at Technical University of Munich, with further study and research in the areas of Artificial Intelligence, as an intermediate step to a Ph.D. In this Academic Statement of Purpose, I will describe my academic background and research interests.

Although My interests in Mathematics goes back to the early time when I was at primary school, my exposure to Computer Science only began after I was invited to attend the most prestigious mathematical lyceum in Ukraine with a stipend. At that time, I won a lot of national contests and olympiads in Programming and Mathematics and received an award from Minor Academy of Sciences of Ukraine in two consecutive years. Among the 180,000 candidates all over Ukraine who appeared for the External Independent Examination in Mathematics, I was qualified in the top 0.09%. I chose to pursue a Bachelor's degree in Applied Mathematics at the Faculty of Cybernetics because, in my view, Mathematics provides the building blocks for every scientific field, including Computer Science.

During my undergraduate years, I have been fortunate to have some minor teaching experience. In the beginning of my 2nd year in university, I was invited to teach an extra-curricular Programming and Algorithms course for the most talented students in my lyceum. I was granted a full freedom on planning and forming the course program. During the next two years, I gave the lectures of Algorithms, Data Structures, Graph Theory, Combinatorics, basic Linear Algebra and Computational Geometry to the class of 27 students, vary from 9th grade to 11th grade. I also designed a C/C++ and Python programming practicum individually for each student, based on their prior knowledge, learning ability, and programming language preference. Most of the students I taught achieved high places on programming contests and olympiads. The constructed responses from students helped me to correct my errors and improve my teaching over time. This experience developed and honed my skills of organizing the teaching materials and communicating my thoughts in front of a responsive and critical audience.

Apart from academia, I have done programming in the commercial environment as well. From February 2017, I started my work at Vision Laboratory, Samsung R&D Institute, Ukraine. During that few month, I gained a lot of experience in working in a diverse group and tackling practical Computer Vision problems in bounded time.

Since my 3rd year in university, I have been performing a research project related to breast cancer diagnosis using computing techniques with Prof. Klyushin Dmitry. The goal of this research project is to check the hypothesis that breast tumors (either cancerous or benign) can cause noticeable changes to other parts of the body, particularly to the buccal epithelial cells. Under the guidance of Prof. Klyushin Dmitry, I applied statistical analysis methods, dimensionality reduction methods, and machine learning techniques, using such parameters as Fractal Dimension, generalized Hurst exponent, robustness, and other characteristics, to analyze the surface of extracted nucleuses from buccal epithelial cells and to examine whether these nucleuses contains any information about patient's oncological diseases. The cells were taken from patients with breast cancer, breast fibroadenomas, and healthy patients. This research has broadened my view on the way we can use applied mathematics and machine learning methods to improve different aspects of a large spectrum of fields. My Bachelor's thesis is related to the applications of Deep Learning, Computer Vision and Feature Extraction methods on medical problems.

In the same academic year, my interests became more focused on Artificial Intelligence, Computer Vision, Numerical Analysis, and Control System Theory. I continued to study these subjects outside the academic curriculum and used my knowledge to perform several personal projects, such as evolving walking creatures in a virtual world using Genetic Algorithms and Recurrent Neural Networks, capturing and reading the car's numbers on images, or training a Convolutional Neural Network to play the game of Go. All these significantly improved my understanding of the subject and further enhanced my interest in the fields of robotics which had captivated my childhood.

My major in Applied Mathematics at the Faculty of Cybernetics have contributed much to my perspective and exposed me to a large spectrum of theoretical knowledge in both Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, especially in Modeling and Optimization, which lies in the foundation of any Machine Learning algorithms. I believe that a strong theoretical basis is crucial for the growth of any technological field, and AI is not an exception.

Through the graduate program, I hope to improve my knowledge upon the theoretical and applied aspects of artificial intelligence, as well as their applications in the perception parts of robotics, such as scene semantic understanding. I believe that the areas of cognition, intelligence, vision and automation possess a tremendous potential for further research and this is what I envisage myself doing in a few years from now, preferably in an academic environment.

From my literature survey, I have found that the research work in computer vision, image classification, scene understanding, object recognition and reconstruction, and machine learning at Technical University of Munich is the state of the art. A large number of recent works in related fields cites to the research papers by faculty members of the Computer Vision Group. After studying about the recent results and research interests of TU Munich, I have confirmed my belief that TU Munich is the college where I want to pursue my Master's degree. I am convinced that the intellectually stimulating and highly competitive atmosphere of TU Munich will bring out the best in me.

I am aware that the graduate program expects very high standards from its students. I am also aware that the study at TU Munich requires dedication, hard work, resilience and a lot of sacrifices. I am confident that given an opportunity, I can contribute to the ongoing work in your graduate program in a productive manner.
